I'm not the first person at this conference
to talk about renv.
In 2020, Kevin Ushay introduced the renv package.
And in 2022, David Aja gave the talk,
You Should Use Renv.
So where are we at today in 2025?
Here's some posts I've pulled from social media.
Andrew says he's about to resubmit an R&R,
which means it's time for the obligatory fight
with updating renv.
TJ says, the restore on renv
never works on the first few goes either.
And Libby says, I have a tolerate-hate relationship
with renv, which is unfortunate
because renv is a wonderful package.
And Kevin and David are both fantastic software engineers,
but sometimes there's a divide
between software engineers and data scientists
such that they cannot anticipate
all of the truly weird and wonderful ways
we try to use their package.
So this talk is for frustrated renv users
and potential renv users.
If you're in the potential bucket,
I'm gonna do my best to get you up to speed,
but I might go a little fast for you.
And for the frustrated renv user,
it's because you've had an experience like this,
where you attempt to renv restore,
you download 19 packages in 25 seconds,
and after all of that time waiting, you have a failure.
And at this point, you're trying things again
in a different order, and you feel like
you're banging against a copy machine
hoping for a different outcome.
And I think the problem is,
when users open a project backed by renv,
they feel like they have one button they can push,
and that's renv restore.
So I hope to convince you
you have a second button you can push,
which is evaluate your project state
against your current R configuration.
Even if you do that, I'm not promising
it's going to be smooth sailing.
This is me preparing for this talk.
I submitted the talk title,
How to Make Renv Actually Work,
and I downgraded it to Practical Renv.
So my goal is to empower renv users
to successfully restore a project environment
by either diagnosing or avoiding restore errors.
To do that, we need a shared baseline understanding
with an intro to renv.
We're also going to need to get into the weeds
of package installation,
because that is what restore does for you.
And then we're going to get into a concrete example
with projects over time.
So let's get started.
This is from the first sentence of the website.
The rrenv package helps you create reproducible environments
for your R projects.
So let's break down this important word, reproducible.
There's a spectrum of reproducibility.
On the lowest end of the spectrum, we have code,
and the middle ground, we have code
and associated package versions at the time of execution.
And on the highest order of reproducibility,
we have code, package versions, R version,
your system dependencies, and your operating system.
And where rrenv fits is in the middle,
with code and package versions,
which is both the beauty and the challenge of rrenv.
The beauty being that it doesn't have all of the overhead
of the upper end of the spectrum,
and the challenge being that it doesn't address
the overhead of the upper end of the spectrum.
We also need to talk about this really important word helps.
The rrenv package helps you
create reproducible environments.
It does not do it for you.
When you use rrenv,
there is an immense amount of user responsibility.
So here's an example project.
I'm going to call it jsonlite-example,
and I initialized it in February of this year.
At this point, rrenv is not activated on this project.
I have an rproj file,
and I have a single file called script.r,
which has one line on it, library jsonlite.
I can initialize rrenv with rrenv init,
in which case I get the message
that I'm recording versions of R
and packages in my lock file,
and in my project directory,
I additionally get a .er profile,
an rrenv lock, and an rrenv directory.
And then when I'm iterating on this project,
I'll do some combination of installing new packages
and snapshotting to record those to my lock file,
and this is pretty smooth sailing.
And so what I have is I have this initial project,
and my R versions and my package versions,
they are all released at different points in time.
They are all available for different lengths of time,
and I'm taking a single slice of that point in time
that represents latest available versions at that date.
So I have my initial project.
Now let's talk about package installation.
A library is a directory containing installed packages.
It's just a folder on your machine
where those installed packages go.
When I don't have rrenv activated on my project,
I have two library paths available to me.
One's a system path, one's a user path,
and I want you to notice
that they're both associated with R version of 4.4,
which is why when R 4.5 is released,
Hadley posts on social media,
happy reinstalling all your R packages day
to all those who celebrate,
because you will physically get a new directory
on your machine in which you need to install those packages.
And so when I don't have rrenv activated on my project,
I have a shared package environment.
I have one library that all of my projects point to.
That one library contains a single version
of JSON Lite 1.8.9,
and all of my projects are forced
to use that single version.
And again, this is all under the umbrella of R 4.4.
When I do have rrenv activated on my project,
I again have two library paths available.
And again, these are associated with R version of 4.4.
Additionally, one of these is project-specific
for my JSON Lite example,
and the other one points to my global cache.
So when I do have rrenv activated,
I have an isolated package environment.
I have a global cache that contains every version
of JSON Lite I could possibly want to use
across all of my projects,
and now all of my projects can be associated
with a different version of JSON Lite,
and this is under the umbrella of R 4.4.
And when we think about any given project,
they have project layers.
We'll call this the project onion.
In our innermost layer,
we have our .rparge file and rrenv lock.
Then we have the packages that are associated
with our analysis, the R version,
the system dependencies, and the operating system.
So keep in mind where rrenv operates
in those innermost layer touching the packages.
Now the rrenv lock is a JSON file
that contains information
from the installed packages description file.
Let's walk through this a bit.
It contains information about the versions
of R and JSON Lite and rrenv.
It contains information about the repositories,
which we just heard a lot about.
That's where you actually installed your package from.
If you haven't done any configuration on your machine,
your default repository probably points to CRAN
at the URL cloudrproject.org.
There's other repositories out there
that you can install packages from.
And we'll be talking more about
the Posit Public Package Manager, or P3M.
We also should talk about this field, needs compilation.
JSON Lite says needs compilation is yes,
and rrenv says needs compilation is no.
Needs compilation means that this requires
compiling tools outside of R,
which touches on your system dependencies
and your operating system,
which are layers that rrenv does not touch.
Now we have to talk about binaries.
So binaries are compiled R packages.
They are very specific to your operating system,
your R version, your package version, and architecture.
Typically, when we install packages,
we either install them from source or binary.
If we start from binary, it's a straight shot to install.
If we start from source, then our machine
has to compile it into a binary,
and then we get to install it.
So that needs compilation step happens
in between going from source to binary,
which means when we install from source,
this is a harder and slower process,
whereas if we install from binary,
this is an easier and faster process.
And typically, the reason why we'll do one over the other
is just simply the availability of the binaries.
They're not always available.
So now, let's talk about projects over time.
I'm gonna pick up this project six months later,
in August of this year, and I'm gonna actively work on it.
And when I pick it up, the entire ecosystem has changed.
There's a new version of R, a new version of rrenv,
and a new version of Jsonlite.
And so now, I have to make some project decisions,
freeze, manage, or update.
And we're gonna think about this
in this versions over time map,
where on one axis, we have our R version increasing,
and on the other axis,
we have our package version increasing.
And where we're starting with our initial project
is right here in the top left-hand corner
with R 4.4.2 and Jsonlite 1.8.9.
So let's talk about the freeze option.
What does this mean in the context of rrenv?
So I'm gonna pose the question
that I am really excited about the new release of base R,
and I want to advance to R 4.5.1.
And so can I do this?
Can I advance to R 4.5.1,
but still use older versions of rrenv and Jsonlite
when I pick up my active project?
And so if we're thinking about what's happening here,
we have moved forward in time, R 4.51 is out,
and I want to use it,
but I wanna move backwards in time
and use an older version of Jsonlite.
Can I do this?
And let's be explicit about what we're doing here.
If we're using a new R version, we will get a new cache.
I had everything working just the way I wanted to
under R 4.4, and now when I'm using R 4.5,
my cache is empty, so I will be forced
to install new packages.
And so we're going to open up this project
under R 4.5.1, and we're going to push the only button
we know how to push, which is rrenv restore.
And unfortunately, I get my failure message, right?
It says I am attempting to install Jsonlite
from source, and it failed.
Instead of crying, let's push our second button.
Evaluate our project state
against our current, our configuration.
So my first question is, do I have the configuration
required for source compilation?
I'm on Windows 11, I have RTools 4.5,
and the answer is yes, I do.
All the machinery is there.
And I can programmatically check that
with a function package build check builds tools,
which yields the result, your system is ready
to build packages.
So that's kind of weird.
Well, if installing from source is a problem,
can I just install from binary instead, right?
I can just bypass this whole compilation issue.
And that gets a little muddy.
So let's think about when binaries are generally available.
When I started this project in February of this year,
Jsonlite 1.8.9 was the latest and greatest
that was available on CRAN,
and the binary for this package
was available on CRAN at that time,
and also on Posit Public Package Manager P3M.
And the gray squares were future versions.
Now, six months later, CRAN hosts binaries
for latest available package versions.
So Jsonlite 2.0 is gonna be on CRAN, not 1.8.9.
If I do wanna go back in time,
P3M does actually host binaries for older releases.
But where I'm at in the upper right-hand corner
of this matrix, there is no binary available
for this combination of things.
So can I install from binary instead?
The answer is no.
Which leads me to think, am I doing something weird?
So you get a little hint of this at the top of your console.
RM tells you, hey, you're using R 4.51,
but your log file was generated with R 4.4.2.
And that picture we just showed about binary availability
speaks to a general reflection
of what's going on in the R ecosystem.
So in the R ecosystem, things work really well
at any given point in time when we're looking
at latest releases available at that point in time.
The diagonal is a good place to be.
The lower triangle is also an okay place to be.
We can do things like stay on R 4.4
and use a newer version of a package.
The upper triangle, no.
We don't want to be here.
This is undefined, uncharted territory.
And if you find yourself lost and wandering
to this undefined territory, it's not your fault.
It's nothing to be ashamed of.
With RM, unfortunately, it is quite easy
to accidentally do something that is quite unnatural
to the R ecosystem.
But if you do find yourself there,
I want you to look at yourself in the mirror,
say no, and slap yourself out of it.
I'm not saying things won't ever work there.
They will work sometimes.
But eventually, you will hit unnecessary pain and suffering.
So am I doing something weird?
Yes.
So the correct way to freeze a project
is to return to its initial state.
I want to revert back to that original R version.
So let's go back in time.
Now, if you're not aware, you can have multiple versions
of R installed on your machine,
and a wonderful tool for switching
between those R versions is called rig,
which is known as the R installation manager.
So in your terminal, you can submit rig default 4.4.2.
So now, I've reverted back to my original version of R,
and at this point, RM restore becomes a trivial
and easy process.
So I can successfully install package versions
from my repository specified in the lock file.
And remember, that was originally set to CRAN
when I started this six months ago.
Now, I've advanced in the future,
and when I'm looking at my binary availability chart,
if I'm really trying to go back in time
to this version 1.8.9,
that's no longer available on CRAN in binary.
So if I want to take advantage of that binary,
I can go to P3M to get that binary.
And you can do that by supplying the repose argument
in the RM restore function.
And there's a third way you can do this,
which is with the RM checkout function.
So in RM checkout, you supply a date,
and then RM will install date-based package versions
such that they fetch the latest available versions
up to that date.
Let's talk about the manage decision.
So I'm calling it manage when I want to maintain
my R version of 4.4.2,
but I want to advance to JSON Lite 2.0
to use the latest and greatest.
And remember, this is an okay place to be
in the R ecosystem.
This is pretty simple.
In this case, I would do install of JSON Lite,
and then snapshot to record that to my lock file.
And lastly, what about update?
Update means I want to bring everything forward
into the future, including my R and my package versions.
And in our R ecosystem map, this is a great place to be.
There's three steps to updating.
First, you'll execute RM upgrade
to upgrade RM to the latest available version.
Then you'll execute RM install
to install all latest package versions.
And lastly, snapshot to record those versions
to the lock file.
And I want to be clear here
that if you're actively working on a project,
regularly updating is the happy path.
It allows you to reckon with upgrading
your package versions in a controlled manner.
So to summarize,
RM places an immense amount of responsibility on the user.
And it is a package that you should truly
read the documentation front to end.
Because what we've talked about here
in terms of what RM does and does not do for you
is listed in the caveats.
So please, read the documentation.
And another framework that's in the RM documentation
is how you handle active projects.
It gives you these kind of decision-making frameworks.
And if you're using RM on an active project,
if you're thinking about the freeze option,
I just want to keep those package versions stable,
that's really just short-term sustainable.
It's gonna come back to bite you,
and it's gonna be harder the more time that elapses.
Managing by doing one-off upgrades of a package
is also short-term sustainable.
It's gonna really kind of lead to a fragile R ecosystem.
And then updating is truly
the only long-term sustainable way to go.
And if you think about the reproducibility spectrum,
just remember where RM sits, right in the middle.
There might be times and places where you need to go
to the upper end of that reproducibility spectrum
and use something like a container, like Docker.
And I love this example from Andrew Heiss.
He's got a wonderful repository
that shows you how you can execute code
from a published paper using all methods of the spectrum,
using Docker, using renv,
or just using packages installed locally system-wide.
So to go back to what David said,
you should use renv, I agree,
but you should use it with intention.
There's a lot of places you can get into the weeds here.
I didn't have time for everything.
So if you want more tips and details,
you can go to my GitHub repository,
Shannon Pileggi, PracticalRenv.
And I wanna give you a huge thank you to David
for helping me reason through all of this,
and Kevin for also listening to this,
and everyone else who's supported me along the way.
Thank you.